Add the SLBeta3 Release Note (#2897)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-beta3/RELEASE_NOTE.md

```

- Introduced `queryConcat()` and `arrayFlattenQuery()` util functions to create a complex query dynamically.
  - The `queryConcat()` function creates a parameterized query by concatenating a set of parameterized queries.
    ```ballerina
    sql:ParameterizedQuery query = `SELECT * FROM students`;
    sql:ParameterizedQuery query1 = ` WHERE id < ${id} AND age > ${age}`;
    sql:ParameterizedQuery sqlQuery = sql:queryConcat(query, query1);
    ```
  - The `arrayFlattenQuery()` is introduced to make the array flattening easier. It makes the inclusion of 
    varying array elements into the query easier by flattening the array to return a parameterized query.
    ```ballerina
    int[] ids = [1, 2];
    sql:ParameterizedQuery sqlQuery = sql:queryConcat(`SELECT * FROM DataTable WHERE id IN (`, sql:arrayFlattenQuery(ids), `)`);
    ```

##### WebSocket Package
- Added OAuth2 JWT bearer grant type support for the client
- Introduced retrying for the WebSocket client
- Introduced the header annotation and query param binding support

##### FTP Package
- Added SFTP and related security
- Added the support for an anonymous user

#### Improvements

##### GraphQL Package

> - Validated the `maxQueryDepth` at runtime as opposed to validating it at compile time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Validating the `maxQueryDepth` at runtime as opposed to validating it at compile time
```

Reviewer: +1 or something like 

Moved `maxQueryDepth` validation from compile-time to runtime.

Reviewer 2: +1 for thisaru's suggestion above

Author: Updated as follows:

Moved the `maxQueryDepth` validation from compile-time to runtime.

```ballerina
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`'limit`).
int limit = 5;
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`string:'join()`).
string b = string:join(" ", "hello", "world!"); 
``` 

#### Bug Fixes

- In a stream type `stream<T, C>`; the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. A bug where this was not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.

```ballerina
class StreamImplementor {
   public isolated function next() returns record {|int value;|}|error? {
       return;
   }
}
 
stream<int, error> stm = new (new StreamImplementor()); // Will now result in an error.
```

- Resource methods are no longer added to the type via object type inclusions. This was previously added even though resource methods do not affect typing.

```ballerina
service class Foo {
   resource function get f1() returns string {
       return "foo";
   }
 
   function f2() returns int => 42;
}
 
// It is no longer required to implement the `get f1` resource method.
service class Bar {
   *Foo;
 
   function f2() returns int => 36;
}
```

> - A bug in string unescaping of unicode codepoints > `0xFFFF` has been fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A bug in string unescaping of Unicode codepoints > `0xFFFF` has been fixed.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
  string str = "Hello world! \u{1F600}";
  io:println(str);
}
```

> The above code snippet which previously printed `Hello world!  ὠ0` will now print `Hello world! 😀`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above code snippet, which previously printed `Hello world!  ὠ0` will now print `Hello world! 😀`.
```

For example, if a configurable variable with open record type is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
type Person record {
};

configurable Person person = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
[person]
intVal = 22
floatVal = 22.33
stringVal = "abc"
arrVal = [1,2,3]
mapVal.a = "a"
mapVal.b = 123
```

The additional fields that are created from the TOML values will have the following types.

* TOML Integer - `int`
* TOML Float - `float`
* TOML String - `string`
* TOML Boolean - `boolean`
* TOML Table - `map<anydata>`
* TOML Table array - `map<anydata>[]`

Similarly, if a configurable variable with a record type that contains a rest field is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
public type Numbers record {|
   int ...;
|};

configurable Numbers numbers = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
num1 = 11
num2 = 26
```

##### Improved the Printed Error Stacktrace to Include the Cause

The error stack trace has been improved to include the error cause locations. Stack frames of the wrapped error causes are also added to the stack trace.

E.g.,

> For the following example,

Reviewer 2: Isn't it repetitive to have both `E.g.` and `following example`?

Author: Removed the `E.g.` part.

int count = sqlClient->queryRow(`SELECT COUNT(*) FROM ExTable`);
```

- Introduced `queryConcat()` and `arrayFlattenQuery()` util functions to create a complex query dynamically.
  - The `queryConcat()` function creates a parameterized query by concatenating a set of parameterized queries.
    ```ballerina
    sql:ParameterizedQuery query = `SELECT * FROM students`;
    sql:ParameterizedQuery query1 = ` WHERE id < ${id} AND age > ${age}`;
    sql:ParameterizedQuery sqlQuery = sql:queryConcat(query, query1);
    ```
  - The `arrayFlattenQuery()` is introduced to make the array flattening easier. It makes the inclusion of 
    varying array elements into the query easier by flattening the array to return a parameterized query.
    ```ballerina
    int[] ids = [1, 2];
    sql:ParameterizedQuery sqlQuery = sql:queryConcat(`SELECT * FROM DataTable WHERE id IN (`, sql:arrayFlattenQuery(ids), `)`);
    ```

##### WebSocket Package
- Added OAuth2 JWT bearer grant type support for the client
- Introduced retrying for the WebSocket client
- Introduced the header annotation and query param binding support

##### FTP Package
- Add SFTP and related security

> - Add the support for an anonymous user

Reviewer 2: Past tense is used for all the other statements, but not in the above two.

#### Improvements

##### GraphQL Package

> - Validate the `maxQueryDepth` at runtime as opposed to validating it at compile time

Reviewer 2: Same as above

Author: Changed to `Validated`.

    ```ballerina
    stream<RowType, error?> resultStream = sqlClient->query(``);
    ```
- Improved Error Types in SQL module with the introduction of typed errors for data manipulation under `sql:ApplicationError`.
- Removed support for the string query parameter.

    **Previous syntax**
    ```ballerina
    stream<RowType, error?> resultStream = sqlClient->query("SELECT * FROM Students;");
    ```
    **New syntax**
    ```ballerina
    stream<RowType, error?> resultStream = sqlClient->query(`SELECT * FROM Students;`);
    ```

##### IO Package
- Changed the `io:readin` function input parameter to optional. In the previous API, it was required to pass a value to be printed before reading the user input as a string. Remove it due to the breaking change and made it optional. It is not recommended to pass a value to print it in the console.

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta3](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+Beta3%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

### Code to Cloud Updates

#### Improvements
- Added a flag to disable docker image generation

> - Added the secret generation support for http clients

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added the secret generation support for HTTP clients
```

- Improved reference resolving for accessing a separate module data type to map OAS object schemas
- Improved nullable record field mapping to an OAS schema property
 
#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta2 of the repositories below.

- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta3%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)
- [Update Tool](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-update-tool/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+project%3Aballerina-platform%2F32)
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-openapi/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta3%22+label%3AType%2FBug)
- [Debugger](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3AArea%2FDebugger+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta3%22+is%3Aclosed)
- [Test Framework](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3ATeam%2FTestFramework+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta2%22+label%3AType%2FBug+)

> #### Ballerina Packages Updates

Reviewer 2: What is this topic?

Author: Removed it.

The following service and its methods are now inferred to be isolated.

```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
 
int defaultIncrement = 10;
 
service / on new http:Listener(8080) {
   private int value = 0;
 
   resource function get value() returns int {
       int value;
       lock {
           value = self.value;
       }
 
       lock {
           return value + defaultIncrement;
       }
   }
 
   resource function post increment(int i) {
       lock {
           self.value += i;
       }
   }
}
```

The compiler does not infer `isolated` for any constructs that are exposed outside the module.

#### Type Narrowing in the `where` Clause of a Query Expression/Action

The `where` clause in a query now narrows the types similar to `if` statements.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() returns error? {
   int?[] v = [1, 2, (), 3];
   int total = 0;
   check from int? i in v
       where i is int
       do {
           // Type of `i` is narrowed to `int`.
           total += i;
       };
   io:println(total); // Prints 6.
}
```

### Improvements

#### Enum Declarations with Duplicate Members

> Enum declarations can have duplicate members.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enum declarations can now have duplicate members.
```

For example, the following declarations in which both `LiftStatus` and `TrailStatus` have the same `OPEN` and `CLOSED` members are now allowed.

```ballerina
enum LiftStatus {
   OPEN,
   CLOSED = "0",
   HOLD
}
 
enum TrailStatus {
   OPEN,
   CLOSED = "0"
}
```

However, it is an error if the same enum declaration has duplicate members. Similarly, it is also an error if different enums initialize the same member with different values.

#### Use of `string:Char` as the Static Type of String Member Access

The static type of the member access operation on a value of type `string` has been updated to be `string:Char` instead of `string`.

```ballerina
public function main() {
   string str = "text";
 
   // Can now be assigned to a variable of type `string:Char`.
   string:Char firstChar = str[0];
}
```

#### Directly Calling Function-typed Fields of an Object

> Fields of an object that are of a function type can now be directly called via an object value using the method call syntax.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Fields of an object that are of a function type can now be called directly via an object value using the method call syntax.
```

}
```

#### Tuple to JSON Compatibility

A tuple value whose members are JSON compatible can now be used in a context that expects a JSON value.

```ballerina
[string, int, boolean...] a = ["text1", 1, true, false];
// Now allowed.
json b = a;
```

#### Error Return in the `init` Method of a Service Declaration

Previously, the `init` method of a service declaration could not have a return type containing an error. That restriction has been removed with this release.
If the `init` method of a service declaration returns an error value, it will result in a module initialization failure.

```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
 
service / on new http:Listener(8080) {
   function init() returns error? {
       // Return an error for demonstration.
       // This will result in module initialization failing.
       return error("Service init failure!");
   }
}
```

#### Using `check` in Object Field Initializers

`check` can now be used in the initializer of an object field if the class or object constructor expression has an `init` method with a compatible return type (i.e., the error type that the expression could evaluate to is a subtype of the return type of the `init` method).

> If the expression is used with `check` results in an error value, the `init` method will return the error resulting in either the `new` expression returning an error or the object constructor expression resulting in an error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the expression that is used with `check` results in an error value, the `init` method will return the error resulting in either the `new` expression returning an error or the object constructor expression resulting in an error.
```

   int lowerLimit;
 
   // `check` can be used in the field initializer
   // since the `init` method's return type allows `error`.
   int upperLimit = check value.ensureType();
 
   function init(int lowerLimit) returns error? {
       self.lowerLimit = lowerLimit;
   }
}
 
public function main() {
   NumberGenerator|error x = new (0);
 
   if x is error {
       io:println(x);
   }
}
```

#### Wildcard Binding Pattern Support in Variable Declarations

The wildcard binding pattern can now be used in a variable declaration with a value that belongs to type `any`.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
float _ = 3.14;
var _ = io:println("hello");
```

Using the wildcard binding pattern when the value is an error will result in a compilation error.

```ballerina
var _ = error("custom error"); // Compilation error.
```

#### Relaxed Static Type Requirements for `==` and `!=`

Previously, `==` and `!=` were allowed only when both operands were of static types that are subtypes of `anydata`. This has now been relaxed to allow `==` and `!=` if the static type of at least one operand is a subtype of `anydata`.

```ballerina
error? x = ();
 
// Now allowed.
if x == () {
 
}
``` 

> #### Relaxed Query Expression Keywords

Reviewer 3: @hasithaa, @rdulmina, since the spec issue for this is still open, should we avoid mentioning this specifically in the release note for beta3? In case there could be some changes?

Reviewer 4: Spec Issue is a more general one right? This is just a part of that issue and I think this is finalized. Hence, IMO this information is worth mentioning in the release note.

Reviewer 5: Shall we remove this from the release note for now.

Identifiers that are keywords in a query expression context (`where`, `join`, `order`, `by`, `equals`, `ascending`, `descending`, `limit`, `outer`, and `select`) can now be used as ordinary identifiers outside query contexts (i.e., they are no longer required to be quoted identifiers).

```ballerina
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`'limit`).

> int limit = 5;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
int limit = 5;

```

// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`string:'join()`).
string b = string:join(" ", "hello", "world!"); 
``` 

### Bug Fixes

> - In a stream type `stream<T, C>;` the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. The bug of this being not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.

Reviewer 3: "The bug of this" doesn't read right IMO.

```suggestion
- In a stream type `stream<T, C>;` the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. A bug which resulted in this not being validated for stream implementors has been fixed.
```

    ```ballerina
    class StreamImplementor {

>     public isolated function next() returns record {|int value;|}|error? {
>         return;
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        public isolated function next() returns record {|int value;|}|error? {
        
        }
```

    }
    
    stream<int, error> stm = new (new StreamImplementor()); // Will now result in an error.
    ```

- Resource methods are no longer added to the type via object type inclusions. This was previously added even though resource methods do not affect typing.
    ```ballerina

>     service class Foo {
>     resource function get f1() returns string {
>         return "foo";
>     }
>     
>     function f2() returns int => 42;
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    service class Foo {
        resource function get f1() returns string => "foo";
    
        function f2() returns int => 42;
    }
```

    
    // It is no longer required to implement the `get f1` resource method.

>     service class Bar {
>     *Foo;
>     
>     function f2() returns int => 36;
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    service class Bar {
        *Foo;
    
        function f2() returns int => 36;
    }
```

    ```

- A bug in string unescaping of Unicode codepoints > `0xFFFF` has been fixed.
    ```ballerina
    import ballerina/io;
    

>     public function main() {
>     string str = "Hello world! \u{1F600}";
>     io:println(str);
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    public function main() {
        string str = "Hello world! \u{1F600}";
        io:println(str);
    }
```

    ```

The above code snippet, which previously printed `Hello world!  ὠ0` will now print `Hello world! 😀`.

- A bug in escaping `NumericEscape` has been fixed.
    ```ballerina
    import ballerina/io;
    
    public function main() {

>     string str = "\\u{61}pple";
>     io:println(str);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        string str = "\\u{61}pple";
        io:println(str);
```

    }
    ```

This code snippet, which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.

- A bug that resulted in `NumericEscape` in the template string not being interpreted literally has been fixed.
    ```ballerina
    import ballerina/io;
    
    public function main() {

>     string str = string `\u{61}pple`;
>     io:println(str);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        string str = string `\u{61}pple`;
        io:println(str);
```

    The following will now result in errors.
    ```ballerina
    const int INTEGER = INTEGER; // Compilation error.

    public function main() {
        string s = let string[] arr = [s] in arr[0]; // Compilation error.
    }
    ```

- Type narrowing is now reset on any assignment to a narrowed variable. Previously, type narrowing was not reset if the static type of the new value was a subtype of the narrowed type. This was a deviation from the specification.
    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        int|string v = 0;

        if v is int {
            int x = v; // Valid.

            // Now, the type is reset to `int|string` even though `1` belongs to `int`.
            v += 1;

            int y = v; // Invalid, will now result in an error.
        }
    }
    ```

To view all bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta3](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta3%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE).

## Runtime Updates

### Improvements

#### Improved Configurable Variables to Support XML Types Through TOML Syntax

> The `configurable` feature is improved to support variables with XML types through the TOML syntax.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `configurable` feature is improved to support variables of XML types through the TOML syntax.
```

> For example, if the XML-typed configurable variables are defined in the following way,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if an XML-typed configurable variable is defined in the following way,
```

Can't we say 
```suggestion
For example, if an XML-typed configurable variable is defined as
```

Reviewer 3: Or
```suggestion
For example, if an XML-typed configurable variable is defined as follows
```

Author: @HindujaB

``` ballerina
configurable xml xmlVar = ?;
```

> the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the value can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.
```

```toml
xmlVar = "<book><name>Sherlock Holmes</name></book>"
```

> #### Improved Configurable Variables to Support Additional Fields and Rest Fields for Records

Reviewer 3: Not sure I get what additional fields means here? @HindujaB @warunalakshitha 

Shouldn't this be
```suggestion
#### Improved Configurable Variables to Support Open Records
```

Reviewer 6: Configurability was supported earlier for open records if we don't configure any extra fields. An improvement is done to support extra fields shapes in record values. 
I think we can use the term `extra field shapes` instead of  both `Additional Fields` and `Rest Fields` , as it is used in the spec.

Reviewer 3: How about
```suggestion
#### Improved Configurable Variables to Support Extra Fields with Open Records
```

or
```suggestion
#### Support to Provide Extra Fields for Configurable Variables of Open Record Types
```

We'll have to update the description too.

Reviewer 3: @HindujaB both the following are open records and only open records allow extra fields.

```ballerina
type Foo record {|
    anydata...;  
|};

type Bar record {
};
```

Didn't get what you mean by "I think we can remove the open record part, as rest fields are not supported for open records."?

> The `configurable` feature is improved to support additional fields and rest fields in record variables through the TOML syntax.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `configurable` feature is improved to support configuring extra fields in record variables through TOML syntax.
```

> For example, if a configurable variable with an open record type is defined in the following way,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For example, if a configurable variable of an open record type is defined in the following way,
```

```ballerina
type Person record {
};

configurable Person person = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
[person]
intVal = 22
floatVal = 22.33
stringVal = "abc"
arrVal = [1,2,3]
mapVal.a = "a"
mapVal.b = 123
```

> The additional fields that are created from the TOML values will have the following types.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The extra fields that are created from the TOML values will have the following types.
```

* TOML Integer - `int`
* TOML Float - `float`
* TOML String - `string`
* TOML Boolean - `boolean`
* TOML Table - `map<anydata>`
* TOML Table array - `map<anydata>[]`

> Similarly, if a configurable variable with a record type that contains a rest field is defined in the following way,

Reviewer 3: I don't think the spec uses the term rest field.

https://ballerina.io/ballerina-spec/spec.html#record-rest-descriptor

> Similarly, if a configurable variable with a record type that contains a rest field is defined in the following way,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Similarly, if a configurable variable of a closed record type is defined in the following way,
```

```ballerina
public type Numbers record {|
   int ...;
|};

configurable Numbers numbers = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
num1 = 11
num2 = 26
```

#### Improved the Printed Error Stacktrace to Include the Cause

The error stack trace has been improved to include the error cause locations. Stack frames of the wrapped error causes are also added to the stack trace.

For the following example,

```ballerina
public function main() {
    panic bar();

> }
> function bar() returns error {
>     return error("a", y());
> }
> function y() returns error {
>     return x();
> }
> function x() returns error {
>     return error("b");
> }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
}

function bar() returns error {
    return error("a", y());
}

function y() returns error {
    return x();
}

function x() returns error {
    return error("b");
}
```

```

the expected stack trace will be as follows.

```
error: a

> at cause_location.0:bar(main.bal:6)
> cause_location.0:main(main.bal:2)
> cause: b
> at cause_location.0:x(main.bal:14)
> cause_location.0:y(main.bal:10)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
at cause_location.0:bar(main.bal:5)
cause_location.0:main(main.bal:2)
cause: b
at cause_location.0:x(main.bal:11)
cause_location.0:y(main.bal:8)
```

... 2 more
```
#### New Runtime Java APIs

> ##### Invoke the Ballerina Object Method Asynchronously

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be

```suggestion
##### API to Invoke a Ballerina Object Method Asynchronously
```

@warunalakshitha

> New Java Runtime APIs are introduced to execute the Ballerina object method from Java. The object method caller can decide whether to execute the object method sequentially or concurrently using the appropriate API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
New Java Runtime APIs are introduced to execute a Ballerina object method from Java. The object method caller can decide whether to execute the object method sequentially or concurrently using the appropriate API.
```

> If the caller can ensure that the given object and object method is isolated and no data race is possible for the mutable state with given arguments, they can use the `invokeMethodAsyncConcurrently` method, or otherwise, the `invokeMethodAsyncSequentially` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the object and the method are `isolated` and the caller can ensure that there will be no data race with arguments that have mutable state, they can use the `invokeMethodAsyncConcurrently` method, or otherwise, the `invokeMethodAsyncSequentially` method.
```

```java
boolean isIsolated = object.getType().isIsolated(methodName);
if (isIsolated) {
    BFuture bFuture = env.getRuntime().invokeMethodAsyncConcurrently(object, methodName, strandName, metadata, 
                                    callback, properties, returnType, args);
} else {
    BFuture bFuture = env.getRuntime().invokeMethodAsyncSequentially(object, methodName, strandName, metadata,
                                    callback, properties, returnType, args);
}
```

> **Info:** The previous `invokeMethodAsync` methods are deprecated.

> #####  API to Retrieve the Isolated Ballerina Object or Object Method 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#####  API to Retrieve whether a Ballerina Object or Method is `isolated`
```

The two new APIs below are introduced to the `ObjectType`.

```java
boolean isIsolated();
boolean isIsolated(String methodName);
```

> #### Removed the Package Version from the Runtime

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't the title reflect the fully-qualified part?

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Removed Fully-Qualified Package Version from Runtime
```

> The fully-qualified package version has been removed from the runtime and will only have the major version. Therefore, when you provide the version to the Ballerina runtime Java API like creating runtime values, you need to provide only the package runtime version. The stack traces will contain only the major package versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The fully-qualified package version has been removed from the runtime and will only have the major version. Therefore, when you provide the version to the Ballerina runtime Java API (e.g., when creating values), you need to provide only the package runtime version. The stack traces will contain only the major package versions.
```

- Added mutation support for GraphQL services
- Added typename introspection
- Added input objects support
- Added block string support
- Added `graphql:Context` to support sharing meta-information between the resolvers

#### `grpc` Package
- Added declarative auth configurations
- Added timestamp, duration, and struct type support
- Added OAuth2 JWT bearer grant type support for the client
- Introduced the support for a directory with PROTO files as the input (`--input` flag) for the gRPC command
- Introduced the support for external import paths in the gRPC command using the `--proto_path` flag
- Added the PROTO file name as a suffix for the `ROOT_DESCRIPTOR` constant and `getDescriptorMap` function to fix the re-declared symbol issue when multiple stub files are put into the same module. If you are going to regenerate the stub files with the Swan Lake Beta3 release, you need to change the service annotation like below.
    ```ballerina
    @grpc:ServiceDescriptor {
    descriptor: ROOT_DESCRIPTOR_<PROTO_FILE_NAME>,
    descMap: getDescriptorMap<Proto_File_Name>()
    }
    service "HelloWorld" on new grpc:Listener(9090) {
    ```

#### `http` Package

> - Enabled HTTP trace and access log support

Reviewer 7: @MaryamZi each stdlib repo contains a changelog with the respective changes along with issues. (https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-http/blob/master/changelog.md) I believe more info can be found there. 
But also it's better if we can hyperlink each entry with the respective issue which kinda ease the user to find more info.

> - Enabled HTTP trace and access log support

Reviewer 7: The respective PR which closed the issue should have the example section in the PR description. The section is deliberately added to the PR template to understand the new change with an example snippet. 

https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-http/pull/528

> - Enabled HTTP trace and access log support

Reviewer 7: Also Netty does the same and point to the respective PR for more info
https://netty.io/news/2021/09/09/4-1-68-Final.html

> - Enabled HTTP trace and access log support

Author: Created https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/2897#discussion_r725854231 to create a set of guidelines for the release note.

### Code to Cloud Updates

#### Improvements
- Added a flag to disable the Docker image generation
- Added the secret generation support for HTTP clients
- Improved diagnostics for failed value retrievals
- Added support for multiple volumes

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Beta3](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-c2c/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Beta3%22).

### Dependency Management Updates

With Swan Lake Beta3, the way how dependencies of a package are managed has been changed. The new implementation will ensure the following. 

 - The new build will ensure that you will get updates of the dependent packages (direct or transitive) automatically
 - Introducing the `--sticky` flag in case you want to lock the dependency versions for subsequent builds

The following changes have been introduced.

- Introduced the `Dependencies.toml` version 2. Going forward, this will be automatically managed by the `build` command and you should not modify it. If you already have a `Dependencies.toml` file, it will be automatically updated to the new version.

> - Packages in the local repository need to be configured in the `Ballerina.toml` file. The format is as follows.

Reviewer 2: Are we using fullstop at the end of bullet points? Seems not consistent here and the line 703 and 704

## Updating Ballerina

If you are already using Ballerina, you can use the [Update Tool](/learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/update-tool/) to directly update to Ballerina Swan Lake Beta3 as follows. 

To do this, first, execute the command below to get the update tool updated to its latest version. 

> `bal update`

If you are using an **Update Tool version below 0.8.14**, execute the `ballerina update` command to update it. Next, execute the command below to update to Swan Lake <VERSION>.

> `bal dist pull slbeta3`

## Installing Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

## Language Updates

### New Features

#### Introduction of the `!is` Operator

The `!is` operator has been introduced to check if a value does not belong to a given type. This is the negation of the `is` operator.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
   int|string? x = 10;
 
   if x !is () {
       io:println("int or string value: ", x);
   }
}
```

#### Inferring Types for Numeric Literals in Additive and Multiplicative Expressions

> The type for numeric literals in additive and multiplicative expressions is now inferred from the contextually-expected type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The types for numeric literals in additive and multiplicative expressions are now inferred from the contextually-expected type.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
float _ = 3.14;
var _ = io:println("hello");
```

Using the wildcard binding pattern when the value is an error will result in a compilation error.

```ballerina
var _ = error("custom error"); // Compilation error.
```

#### Relaxed Static Type Requirements for `==` and `!=`

Previously, `==` and `!=` were allowed only when both operands were of static types that are subtypes of `anydata`. This has now been relaxed to allow `==` and `!=` if the static type of at least one operand is a subtype of `anydata`.

```ballerina
error? x = ();
 
// Now allowed.
if x == () {
 
}
``` 

#### Relaxed Query Expression Keywords

Identifiers that are keywords in a query expression context (`where`, `join`, `order`, `by`, `equals`, `ascending`, `descending`, `limit`, `outer`, and `select`) can now be used as ordinary identifiers outside query contexts (i.e., they are no longer required to be quoted identifiers).

```ballerina
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`'limit`).
int limit = 5;
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`string:'join()`).
string b = string:join(" ", "hello", "world!"); 
``` 

### Bug Fixes

> - In a stream type `stream<T, C>`; the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. The bug of this being not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- In a stream type `stream<T, C>;` the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. The bug of this being not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
float _ = 3.14;
var _ = io:println("hello");
```

Using the wildcard binding pattern when the value is an error will result in a compilation error.

```ballerina
var _ = error("custom error"); // Compilation error.
```

#### Relaxed Static Type Requirements for `==` and `!=`

Previously, `==` and `!=` were allowed only when both operands were of static types that are subtypes of `anydata`. This has now been relaxed to allow `==` and `!=` if the static type of at least one operand is a subtype of `anydata`.

```ballerina
error? x = ();
 
// Now allowed.
if x == () {
 
}
``` 

#### Relaxed Query Expression Keywords

Identifiers that are keywords in a query expression context (`where`, `join`, `order`, `by`, `equals`, `ascending`, `descending`, `limit`, `outer`, and `select`) can now be used as ordinary identifiers outside query contexts (i.e., they are no longer required to be quoted identifiers).

```ballerina
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`'limit`).
int limit = 5;
// Now allowed. No longer required to use a quoted identifier (`string:'join()`).
string b = string:join(" ", "hello", "world!"); 
``` 

### Bug Fixes

> - In a stream type `stream<T, C>`; the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. The bug of this being not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we have the back tick after the semicolon?

Reviewer 8: Yup, semicolon should be within back ticks.

If the caller can ensure that the given object and object method is isolated and no data race is possible for the mutable state with given arguments, they can use the `invokeMethodAsyncConcurrently` method, or otherwise, the `invokeMethodAsyncSequentially` method.

```java
boolean isIsolated = object.getType().isIsolated(methodName);
if (isIsolated) {
    BFuture bFuture = env.getRuntime().invokeMethodAsyncConcurrently(object, methodName, strandName, metadata, 
                                    callback, properties, returnType, args);
} else {
    BFuture bFuture = env.getRuntime().invokeMethodAsyncSequentially(object, methodName, strandName, metadata,
                                    callback, properties, returnType, args);
}
```

> **Info:** The previous `invokeMethodAsync` methods are deprecated.

#####  API to Retrieve the Isolated Ballerina Object or Object Method 

The two new APIs below are introduced to the `ObjectType`.

```java
    boolean isIsolated();

>     boolean isIsolated(String methodName);

Reviewer 2: Why the above two code lines indented?

## Standard Library Updates

### New Features

#### `crypto` Package
- Improved the hash APIs for cryptographic salt

#### `graphql` Package
- Added field alias support for GraphQL documents
- Added variable support in GraphQL requests
- Added mutation support for GraphQL services
- Added typename introspection
- Added input objects support
- Added block string support
- Added `graphql:Context` to support sharing meta-information between the resolvers

#### `grpc` Package
- Added declarative auth configurations
- Added timestamp, duration, and struct type support
- Added OAuth2 JWT bearer grant type support for the client
- Introduced the support for a directory with PROTO files as the input (`--input` flag) for the gRPC command
- Introduced the support for external import paths in the gRPC command using the `--proto_path` flag
- Added the PROTO file name as a suffix for the `ROOT_DESCRIPTOR` constant and `getDescriptorMap` function to fix the re-declared symbol issue when multiple stub files are put into the same module. If you are going to regenerate the stub files with the Swan Lake Beta3 release, you need to change the service annotation like below.

> ```ballerina

Author: Done.

@grpc:ServiceDescriptor {
   descriptor: ROOT_DESCRIPTOR_<PROTO_FILE_NAME>,
   descMap: getDescriptorMap<Proto_File_Name>()
}
service "HelloWorld" on new grpc:Listener(9090) {
```

#### `http` Package
- Enabled HTTP trace and access log support
- Added HATEOAS link support
- Introduced the `http:Cache` annotation to the resource signature
- Introduced support for the service-specific media-type subtype prefix
- Introduced the introspection resource method to get the generated OpenAPI document of the service
- Added OAuth2 JWT bearer grant type support for client

#### `jwt` Package
- Added HMAC signature support for JWT
  
#### `log` Package

> - Added observability span context values to the log messages when observability is enabled.

Reviewer 2: Check the consistency of using fullstop again in all places.

Author: Fixed.
